# EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF HIGH PERFORMANCE ALGORITHMS ON INTEL XEON PHI

Bachelor thesis

Dominik Simek <xsimek23@stud.fit.vutbr.cz>

FIT VUT 2015


## Abstract

This thesis is dedicated to the implementation of high performance algorithms on the Intel Xeon Phi coprocessor. The Xeon phi was introduced by Intel as a new MIC (Many Integrated Core) architecture in 2012. The theoretical part of the thesis is focused on the architecture of the coprocessor (with peak performance of 2 tFLOPS for a single precision data) and on the procedure of algorithms implementation and optimization. The theoretical knowledge is then applied to a practical examples with demonstration of the implementation and  the optimization of algorithms and work with the coprocessor. In the practical part of the thesis, simple benchmarks such as a vector matrix multiplication and a matrix multiplication are explained and implemented. In the first benchmark 6.5\% of theoretical coprocessor performance was achieved, in the second it was much more. In following chapter a more complex benchmark\,--\,simulation of a particles system (N-Body), that reached more than 35\% of coprocessor performance (725 gFLOPS), is discussed. The following section is dedicated to some interesting problems such as optimization of a MATLAB module k-Wave (propagation  of the ultrasound waves), extraction of I-vector (speech processing), cross-compilation of existing libraries, modules and programs. In the conclusion of the thesis the usage the potential of the Intel Xeon Phi is evaluated.


## Repository structure

~~~~
-.
 |-cross-compilation/
 |-Doxyfile
 |-fft-mkl/
 |-matmul/
 |-matvec/
 |-nbody/
 |-python-mkl/
 |-README.md
 |-text/
~~~~

## Description of each directory

- cross-compilation:
    - the directory contains a instructions to the cross-compilation of the libraries HDF5, SZIP, ZLIB and GNU MAKE
    - see cross-compilation/README.md for more informations

- doc:
    - the directory contains a html documentation (doxygen)
    - and the manual refman-XeonPhi.pdf (also generated by doxygen)

- fft-mkl:
    - the directory contains the source code of a test of fft routines from the Intel MKL on the MIC
    - see fft-mkl/README.md for more informations

- matmul:
    - the directory contains the source code of the matrix multiplication (MKL)
    - see matmul/README.md for more informations

- matvec:
    - the directory contains the source code of the matrix vector multiplication
    - see matvec/README.md for more informations

- nbody:
    - the directory contains the source code of the N-Body simulation
    - see nbody/README.md for more informations

- python-mkl:
    - the directory contains the source code of the DGEMM (Python modules Numpy and Scipy lined with MKL)
    - see python-mkl/README.md for more informations

- text:
    - Latex source code of the thesis
